---
layout: default
title: Running Tesseract
parent: Tigrinya OCR
nav_order: 2
---
# Tesseract
There are several OCR engines. A notable and Unicode freely application we found is called [Tesseract](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract) by Google. Google has made their OCR engine available in the open source community for anyone to use and customize.  It is a good candidate we can rely for Tigrinya OCR. Tesseract has basic support for language with Geez script (including Tigrinya), however for accurate recognition, one has to train the application with enough test samples. As said earlier, availability of good corpus can improve the results, but even without one, Tesseract can produce a descent output, especially if it is well trained and uses clear and good scanned document with common Geez fonts.

In this project we are aiming to train Tesseract so that it will recognize Geez fonts properly and convert them correctly. This means we need to prepare training files for Tesseract OCR. Following that we will develop proper frontend user interface that will help users to easily convert scanned image Tigrinya documents into electronic editable text.

## Installation
To train Tesseract we need to install [tesseract-ocr](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract/releases).

Other application we need to install includes:
* [Cygwin](https://www.cygwin.com/) - if we are using Windows
* [Qr-box-editor](https://github.com/zdenop/qt-box-editor/downloads) - to fix the boxes generated by Tesseract, and ensure we feed the right data into it.

Tesseract comes with English as a default language. During the instalation process we can add Tigrinya language which addes the tir.traineddata file into the C:\Program Files\Tesseract-OCR\tessdata folder. Note that ‘**tir**’ is language code for Tigrinya in Tesseract. This tir.traineddata file is the file that is trained to recognize Geez fonts. Since it is fresh instalation, the file is not well trained. As a starting point we can download [tir.traineddata](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tessdata/blob/master/tir.traineddata) and save the file in /usr/share/tessdata folder.

Once you put the file in the correct folder run the following command to tell Tesseract where the language definitions are:

```
export TESSDATA_PREFIX=/usr/share/tessdata
```

## Run Tesseract
Now we are ready to run OCR on Tigrinya document. The command is as follows:

```
tesseract -l [language name] [input file name] [output file name]
```

Make a one page jpg or tif formatted image containing Tigrinya text. Save it as ‘page01.tif’ and run the following command:

```
tesseract -l tir page01.tif output01
```

The outputo1 file will contain the editable text version of the scanned document.